THE Polish conductor serves his passengers coffee a half-hour before the night train from Berlin pulls into Krakow's main station. After expertly stirring in her nondairy creamer, the Krakow-born economics professor who occupies the lower berth considers the question: What are her townsfolk like? With a resounding zip of her knee-high boots, she announces, with a hint of swagger, that they are proud.

Little wonder. The people of Krakow are citizens of one of nine cities chosen as European cultural capitals for the year 2000, with a recorded history dating back to 965; a city selected by Unesco in 1978 as one of the most remarkable architectural complexes in the world; home to one of Europe's largest medieval marketplaces; central Europe's second oldest university (after Prague); royal seat for six centuries of Polish kings with the kinds of names that make learning history fun: Boleslaus the Bold, Boleslaus the Chaste, Boleslaus the Squintmouth, Ladislaus the Elbow-High.

During the golden renaissance of Polish culture in the 16th century, Krakow was the capital of Europe's most populous kingdom, stretching from the Baltic to the Black Sea, harboring a medley of cultures including Poles, Germans, Lithuanians, Jews, Italians and Hungarians -- a veritable Euro-boomtown.

There remains, of course, the unhappy flip side of Krakow's history: the city's gradual decline after the transfer of the royal seat of power to Warsaw in the early 17th century, the subsequent partitioning of Poland and accompanying loss of independence, the years of Nazi occupation, wrenching postwar relocation, Soviet control, martial law. By the 1980's Krakow's dark side became physically manifest in historic monuments blackened by tons of ash that fell on the city weekly, courtesy of an indifferent industrial machine.

But to stand in the middle of the restored Rynek Glowny, the city's marketplace, is to sense the unique quality of Krakow's pride; a pride both because and in spite of the city's perceptible reality. The intersection of two medieval trade routes, from Prague to the Crimea, and the Amber Road from the Baltic to southern Europe, the 13th-century square marks the open center of a geometric checkerboard of streets that describes the old city. (These streets are, for the most part, wonderfully off limits to motorized traffic.)

Despite the vastness of the space, humanity clearly dominates the scene: South American street musicians gather before the Sukiennice (Cloth Halls) that cut the square in half. The part-Renaissance, part-Gothic arcades now house cafes, rows of wooden stands selling souvenirs and crafts, and upstairs, the National Museum's picture gallery.

Beside an outdoor display of watercolor cityscapes, older men in peaked caps stop to chat, while mothers chase after toddlers who chase after pigeons. Tourist-bearing horse-drawn buggies clip-clop the perimeter, circling couples buying flowers from kerchiefed saleswomen who purposefully ignore the white-faced mime perched on a nearby soapbox. Other couples rest on benches watching other couples stroll, as clusters of laughing students, laden with shopping bags, cram themselves into phone booths. The young women wear short skirts and dark nylons and high black boots, their wide faces turned up.

The pace is appealingly slack. The feel, surrounded by pastel-colored Renaissance and Baroque town houses, amid ambling, stylish locals speaking their blurry, shushing tongue, is decidedly Southern European. Except for one thing: It is freezing. It is February. And this is Middle Europe. A penetrating icy rain slices down, blowing into the young women's upturned faces as a piercing wind rips across the open square, causing the old men to reach for their caps. All those short skirts! Such cold knees. And those frozen fingers, nonchalantly holding cigarettes (no gloves) while friends pause to exchange intimacies, exposed to the elements. It is an entirely imaginary spring that is in the air. The real thing must be breathtaking.

As the full hour approaches, some heads lift to the taller octagonal spire of the Church of the Virgin Mary, a red brick Gothic affair that historically served the city's German patrician class and now dominates the eastern corner of the square. On the hour (give or take a few minutes) one of the church's remote arched windows opens and a faint flash of brass indicates a lone trumpeter. The melody he plays is ancient and stirring, the Hejnal, a medieval reveille that unexpectedly ends mid-bar.

The practice memorializes a brave sentry who in the 13th century raised the alarm from the same tower to warn his townspeople of imminent Tartar invasion. Pierced in the throat by an enemy arrow, the guard was unable to finish his song. Every hour, every day and night these interrupted tones are repeated four times for the four points of the compass; the tribute dates back 700 years. Thus punctuating the day, the ghostly melody evokes a continuing memory of proud sacrifice, when spirited by the wind to the farthest reaches of the old city.

Inside the Church of the Virgin Mary, shortly before noon every day, the doors open to one of the largest Gothic altars in Europe. This most famous work of the Nuremberg artist Wit Stwosz (Veit Stoss in German), what he called his ''Bible made of linden,'' was completed over a 12-year period, from 1477 to 1489.

Some 100 other churches and houses of prayer adorn the streets, covering every architectural period in the art history books and often combining several styles under one roof. There is the Church of St. Andrew, one of the few buildings in Krakow to survive the Tartar invasion of 1241, that conceals within its austere white limestone facade a later, richly ornate Baroque interior. The Gothic Church of St. Francis sports vibrantly colorful, sinuously formed Art Nouveau stained-glass windows by Stanislaw Wyspianski, as well as his decorative frescoes on the walls of the transept and presbytery; surprisingly temporal roses and lilies, seashells and peacock feathers.

In a country that is over 90 percent Catholic, all these churches are very much in use. On a given Sunday you can even find small crowds outside the houses of worship listening to Mass on a loudspeaker. And yet the spirit of Krakow would appear to be dominated by its most populous secular group of citizens -- the students. For this, if there ever was one, is a university town. There are no less than 100,000 students attending 15 institutions of higher learning. That's one eighth of the city's population.

Step into the courtyards of the 16th- and 17th-century houses along Florianska Street or Grodzka Street, the main pedestrian arteries pumping a steady current of life into the market square, and you will find happily ensconced behind Baroque porticos, beneath vaulted passageways, up exterior courtyard staircases, all the commercial byproducts of a vibrant student body: music shops, clothing boutiques, art galleries, bookstores and enough cafes and restaurants to rival the city's roster of churches -- with equally packed houses.

Clearly Krakow's restaurants differ from their Middle European neighbors. While Berliners and Viennese enjoy their kaffee and kuchen behind large windows, to maximize their climate's limited light, Krakow stashes its eateries in the cellars below the old city streets. Here, too, it would seem, the southern European illusion is in effect: as if in need of escape from an invisibly glaring sun, throngs of Krakow's young people retreat into windowless, candlelighted caverns for cappuccino and cheesecake.

Roughly one quarter of Krakow's students attend the Jagiellonen University, founded in 1364 by Casimir the Great. The 1492 Collegium Maius on Jagiellonska Street, with four red-brick Gothic wings enclosing an arcaded courtyard, is the university's oldest building. It houses a museum that includes displays of the medieval ceremonial garb still used today during graduation ceremonies, as well as precious works of art and instruments of science. The library, communal dining hall, treasury and auditorium tell the tale of the university's rich history. Copernicus studied here from 1491 to 1495 and his astronomical instruments are displayed in a room bearing his name. The medieval astrolabes, torquetum and globe of the skies appear, to the uninitiated, as gleaming brass disks and spheres, dangling from chains, mounted on clawed feet, meticulously inscribed with a secret systematic beauty. A mappamundi from 1510 is the first globe to indicate the then-newly discovered American continent: America terra noviter reperta.

THE relics are not all ancient. Neil Armstrong left an autographed picture of the Moon with special thanks to Copernicus. A pen on display was used by the university's most prominent recent alumnus, the theologian Karol Wojtylas, later Archbishop of Krakow, now Pope John Paul II.

Upon returning to the hustle of the market, a distinct and directed undercurrent can be detected in the general comings and goings. This popular stream follows the historic royal processional route south on Grodzka Street, ending at the foot of the Wawel Hill, or ''Polish Acropolis.'' Pedestrian traffic jams the 82-foot climb to the renaissance Wawel Castle where Polish kings reigned for over 500 years, and its adjoining Gothic Cathedral, the site of coronations and royal funerals until 1734.

Upon the hilltop, an imposing and messy complex of towers, cupolas, bastions and battlements commands a magnificent view of the Vistula River and the surrounding city. Within the medieval fortifications -- near the tapestried royal chambers and carved marble tombs of Poland's royalty -- school classes, families, the Polish equivalent of Boy Scouts in uniform, elderly couples puffing from the exertion, babies in carriages, all bask in the warmth of grandeur on a bitter cold day. The crowd contains almost no foreigners. Here, one senses, Poland was never partitioned, reduced or dominated. Here Poland is big. As big as the view. And Krakow remains its capital.

And yet, ironically, the view from Wawel Hill features the single portion of Krakow and Krakow's history that could throw the proud citizenry off stride. A mile southeast of the castle, Kazimierz became the home to Krakow's Jewish population after pogroms drove them out of the Old City at the end of the 15th century. During the golden Polish renaissance, Kazimierz represented the undisputed capital of the Diaspora, a lively cultural and intellectual center that attracted the largest Jewish community in Europe.

By the start of World War II, one quarter of Krakow's residents were Jews. The Jewish quarter itself boasted eight synagogues and numerous other places for religious studies and prayer. Then the Nazis established the Krakow ghetto in Podgorze on the other side of the Vistula. By 1943 Kazimierz was completely emptied of its inhabitants. Many of the Jews of Krakow were transferred to the Warsaw ghetto. Others perished in the Nazi death camps -- Plaszow. Belzec. Auschwitz-Birkenau. Of the 69,000 Jews living in Krakow in 1939, roughly 150 returned after the war.

The gradual revival of so-called ''Post-Jewish'' Kazimierz coincided with Polish political unrest in the mid-1980's. Some people in Krakow sensed that resurrecting the city's Jewish history was one of the keys to saving their own.

Nevertheless, today's non-Jewish Krakowers dedicated to the ethnic revitalization of Kazimierz are walking a fine moral line, and they well know it. On the one hand, ever since Steven Spielberg shot ''Schindler's List'' on Szeroka Street in 1993, there has developed an undiscriminating and in some ways unhealthy interest in all things Jewish. Some fear the neighborhood would turn into an Old World Disneyland, featuring kosher vodka, klezmer music and gefilte fish..

On the other hand, since ''Schindler's List,'' there has developed a very real and sincere dedication to restoring the quarter's Jewish heritage, featuring historical exhibits in the former synagogues, a modern Jewish Cultural Center committed to international discourse, a charming hotel and cafe in the former mikvah, or ritual bath, and, well, kosher food and klezmer music. The distinction is not entirely abstract, for of course there is gefilte fish, and there is gefilte fish. Such subtle variances in flavor are also a Jewish tradition.

The simple fact remains that early on a Saturday morning, before the 16th-century Remu'h Synagogue, the ancient melodies of the Shabbat service still drift from the intimate sanctuary where Krakow's Jews come to pray. A peek inside the entrance reveals a bare wooden table set for kiddush: 12 plates of checkerboard poundcake and 12 cups for the fruit of the vine. Two more than needed for a minyan. In light of the history that these streets have witnessed, this humble scene would appear to be a final heartbreaking wonder in this wondrous city.

Tables and beds in a former seat of kings

For information on events for Krakow 2000, contact the festival office at (48-12) 421 8693, or go to www.krakow2000.pl on the Web. Highlights include the Krakow Ballet Spring, May through July; the Jewish Culture Festival in July and the Tadeusz Kantor Festival in November and December. 
The Old City (Stare Miasto) and the Jewish quarter (Kazimierz) are north of the Vistula River. Vehicular traffic is restricted in the historic center; taxis are at stands only.

Where to Stay

The owners of the newly opened Hotel Klezmer-Hois, Szeroka Street 6, telephone and fax (48-12) 411 1245, were among the pioneers in revitalizing the Jewish quarter. The antique-furnished hotel, in a former mikvah directly across the square from the Remu'h Synagogue, has 11 rooms, a restaurant featuring Middle European Jewish cuisine and nightly klezmer concerts. Doubles: $58 to $67, with breakfast, at 4.17 zlotys to $1.

The 54-room Pod Roza, Florianska Street 14, (48-12) 422 9399, fax (48-12) 421 7513, is one of the oldest hotels near the market square. The renaissance portal has welcomed such guests as Franz Liszt and Czar Alexander I. Doubles with breakfast: $100; after April 1, $118.

Where to Eat

Pod Aniolami, Grodzka Street 35, serves perfectly executed traditional Polish dishes -- borscht, various grilled meats served with baked apples and horseradish, hot spiced mead -- in a darkly romantic vaulted cellar. Dinner for two with wine runs about $22; (48-12) 421 3999. Open Monday to Thursday 1 p.m. to midnight, Friday and Saturday 1 p.m. to 1 a.m.

The peasant fare is delicious at Chlopskie Jadlo, Agnieszki Street 1, (48-12) 421 8520. Guests are seated on farmstead antiques and served specialties like spicy goulash with potato pancakes, pork chops with kasha and steaming pirogi (along with the bread, schmaltz and pot cheese that accompany meals). Dinner for two is roughly $21. Open Monday to Thursday and Sunday, noon to 10 p.m.; Friday and Saturday, noon to midnight. Live Polish folk music Thursday to Saturday.

The walls of Cafe Jama Michalika, Florianska Street 45, (48-12) 422 1561, Krakow's most famous Jugendstil (or Art Nouveau) cafe, are covered with caricatures and drawings donated by artists at the beginning of the century in lieu of payment. The not-too-sweet apple cake with fresh whipped cream is a treat. Open daily 9 a.m. to 10 p.m.

Sightseeing

The Jagiellonen University Museum in the Collegium Maius at Jagiellonska Street 15, (48-12) 422 0549, is open for guided tours only, Monday to Friday, 11 a.m. to 2:20 p.m.; Saturday 11 a.m. to 1:20 p.m. The 30-minute tours ($1.75) can be arranged by appointment upstairs.

The royal chambers of Wawel Castle are open Tuesday to Thursday 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Friday 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m., Saturday 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m., Sunday 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Tickets: $2 October through April, $2.50 May through September. Admission is free on Sunday from October through May, and Wednesday from June through September; expect large crowds these days.

Wawel Cathedral is open Monday to Saturday 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., Sunday and holidays 12:15 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Tickets: $1.50.

Krakow's only active Jewish house of worship, the Remu'h Synagogue at Szeroka Street 40, is named after the famous writer and philosopher, Rabbi Moses Isserles, who is buried in the cemetery next door. A donation of $1.25 is required. Cemetery and synagogue are open to tourists Monday to Friday 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.

The State Museum Auschwitz-Birkenau, at the site of the infamous Nazi death camp, is 36 miles west of Krakow, just over an hour by bus or taxi. The Auschwitz museum, (48-33) 843 2022, is open daily as follows: Dec. 15 through February, 8 a.m. to 3 p.m.; March and April and October to Dec. 15, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m.; May and September, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.; June through August, 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. The Birkenau memorial is open daily 8 a.m. to sundown.
THERE are autumns in Germany that show up weeks too early, pushy guests that have clearly misread the invitation, arriving with bleak gray skies, cold winds and rain when you're still dressed in your summer linens. Then there are autumns, like this year's, that drop by fashionably late. The season takes on each leaf with leisure, and with a warm golden light, illuminates the turning trees apparently for the sake of your simple smiling wonder.

It was on just such a sun-infused fall afternoon several weeks ago, while collecting fat, shiny chestnuts, that my daughter, Claire, addressed me with the mild impatience of a matter-of-fact 6-year-old: ''So who is this Rapunzel person anyway?''

As the Germans would say, it was a moment of personal Schande, or shame, on me as the mother of bicultural, bilingual children. How could my Berlin-born daughter know the words to the theme song of ''Mister Ed'' and not know who Rapunzel was? A long weekend was approaching. The weather was magnificent. I quickly organized a family excursion to the heartland of the Brothers Grimm.

The German Fairy-Tale Road is in fact a 375-mile route starting in Hanau, birthplace of Jacob and Wilhelm, and snaking north through the state of Hesse, into North Rhine-Westphalia and finishing in Bremen on the North Sea. On the cartoonishly-rendered map provided by the local tourist offices, various stops associated with the Grimms's renowned ''Children's and Household Stories'' are marked, as well as villages connected to lesser-known local legends.

Studying the map, I decided to eschew the Museum of the Brothers Grimm in Kassel. This exhibition and research center features a compilation of rare editions and translations of the famous fairy-tale opus -- the work can be read in over 160 languages -- as well as letters, manuscripts and even furniture that belonged to the two industrious linguists. All this I found fascinating from an academic point of view, but not the stuff to spark a small child's imagination.

I then spied the medieval village of Trendelburg, set in the largely agricultural, heavily wooded region to the north of Kassel, and home to ''that Rapunzel person.'' To my delight, just seven and a half miles from there, I noted Sleeping Beauty's castle. That was it. We would cut to the chase. Armed with the annotated edition of the fairy tales and a dogeared college copy of Bruno Bettelheim's ''Uses of Enchantment,'' I set out from Berlin with my husband, Frank, Claire and my 3-year-old son, Leo, for the Reinhardswald (Reinhard Forest), a 77-square-mile woods stretching between the Diemel and Weser Rivers, where I hoped the fairy tales would come alive.

We decided to first visit Dornroschen schloss Sababurg, as Sleeping Beauty's castle is called. (Dornroschen, the German name of the fairy-tale princess, means ''little thorny rose.'') ''Remember, it's not Disneyland,'' Frank cautioned as we passed through quaint half-timbered villages that skirt the forest before we followed signs leading straight into the thick of it. The road wound steadily uphill through oak and beech trees, their leaves that afternoon the color of gingerbread makings: cardamom, cinnamon, candied orange and lemon. The slope felt deceptively gentle; soon we could view the vast valley basin through stately trunks, a carpet of working fields rolled out between the sprinkling of Hansel and Gretel-style houses.

The road then pulled into an emerald glade and before us, set on a steep incline atop a basalt crest, the gray sandstone castle appeared. Its three round towers are capped with dun-colored slate domes that are shaped, I couldn't help thinking, like German military helmets from World War I, with fluted crowns and needle-like tops. The fortress walls, half-clad in ivy, appeared from a distance to be stained with splashes of scarlet and amber paint. While the original central hall of the structure is an open-air ruin (a location for theatrical productions in the warmer months), the restored portion now serves as a hotel and restaurant. We had booked one tower room, complete with a royal-size canopy bed (and cot) and breakfast.

The Sababurg, first called Zappenborgck, was originally built for pilgrims of another ilk. In 1330 the remains of Jesus were ostensibly found in Gottsburen, a neighboring village. To protect the church and its steady stream of visitors, the archbishop of Mainz ordered the founding of the fortress, which was later turned over to the state of Hesse. By the end of the century the pilgrimages had ceased, the remote fortress held no strategic military importance, and it gradually lapsed into ruin. For 100 years the castle was all but forgotten, overgrown with vegetation, including the wild rose bramble that still follows the perimeter wall, accounting for the association with the tale of Sleeping Beauty.

In 1508 the landgrave Wilhelm II restored the castle as a private hunting lodge, yet over the next 300 years the structure repeatedly suffered under the turbulent and often destructive fate of the rest of middle Europe: the Thirty Years' War, the Franco-Prussian War, foreign occupation, fire and neglect. In the 1930's the Sababurg was finally resurrected as a favored resting spot for weary forest wanderers. Now the castle's historic rose garden attracts 45,000 visitors between Easter and October, and every year some 250 couples exchange wedding vows in its 16th-century nuptial chamber.

Our tower room looked just right: immensely thick curving stone walls, long vertically-cut windows, floral canopy draping the four-poster bed. On the stairway landing stood an ancient spinning wheel, and while my husband demonstrated the basic mechanical principles of spinning wool, both children gazed solemnly at the sharp spindle twisting jauntily back and forth, for them no less than the fateful tool with which Sleeping Beauty pricked her finger, thus unleashing her long-predicted spell of slumber. A further element of the landing decor was a baffling group of table and chairs fashioned out of original USA Dimple golf clubs -- the aligned rubber grips forming the seat backs and the woods serving as legs. Sleeping Beauty must have played lots of golf in her free time. ''Before she fell asleep, of course,'' my daughter concluded.

The next morning we headed for the Tierpark Sababurg, a vast 309-acre wildlife refuge (one of the oldest in Europe) sprawling at the foot of the castle grounds. In 1571 the landgrave Wilhelm IV, a man with strong interests in the natural sciences, founded the Tierpark or animal park not only to supply ample game for his sport, but also to provide an opportunity for observing local wildlife in its natural habitat. After his death the park reverted to near-wilderness for over three centuries -- once more shades of Sleeping Beauty. In 1971 the nearby town of Hofgeismar set about restoring the preserve, concentrating efforts on the breeding and preservation of large animals indigenous to the woods of middle Europe. Some species, like the Przewalski horse, would have long since died out if not for such conservation efforts. Roughly 450 animals from 80 species live on the property.

It would seem the animals here have it about as good as it gets. The verdant fields where red deer and reindeer, mules and bison graze extend as far as one can see, interrupted infrequently by weatherbeaten wood fences. That morning a family of lynx posed elegantly in the outstretched arms of an ancient oak tree. A herd of lively wild boar rooted around for grain on the muddy forest floor.

There is a certain rightness about witnessing these animals in this landscape. Once again I was reminded of the Brothers Grimm; not the fairy tales themselves, but the oral historians' justification for collecting them in the first place: ''Their very existence is enough to merit protecting them,'' the authors wrote in their foreword to the 1819 edition. ''That which has so delighted, touched and taught manifold and ever anew, that carries its necessity within itself . . .'' The tales, this nature, both feel absolutely essential, Ur-European. In fact, even if you understand no German, the prefix Ur, or primal, stares down at you over and over again from various informational signs in the park. Here is the Urpony, a wild horse now found living out of captivity only in Cornwall, England. Another animal is called simply an Ur: a type of ox that represents the original ancestor of our own domestic cattle breeds.

Our next step, appropriately, was to the nearby Urwald, a 232-acre portion of the Reinhard Forest that has been deliberately left untouched by humans since 1887. In 1907 a brand new law deemed this section of woods one of Germany's first two official nature preserves. (The chalk cliffs of Rugen constitute the other.)

Oak trees 800 years old are living and dying here; 400-year-old beeches bide time. Human-size ferns recall virginal rain forests. In the hush of the woods it is easy to imagine that the Germanic tribes of Hesse still worshipped trees long after the rest of Europe embraced Christianity. And that St. Boniface only managed to convert the resident pagans by demonstratively chopping down a mighty oak without incurring the wrath of the great tree's injured spirit.

It was lunchtime, and we decided to drive to Trendelburg to eat in Rapunzel's castle before heading back home. Like Sababurg, the Trendelburg fortress dates back to the 1300's, and it, too, managed to survive various incarnations as hunting castle, government administrative seat, ruin and finally since 1957, privately owned hotel and restaurant. Unlike Sababurg, this medieval fortress is set right smack in the heart of a charming and modest half-timbered village. Castle and houses perch high on a sandstone ridge, belted below by a tight loop in the Diemel River.

We crossed a narrow footbridge that leads across the castle's dry moat, only to find the iron entrance gate to the fivesided fortress closed and locked. It was Monday, Ruhetag or ''rest day,'' and apparently no one was home. The whole village was inordinately quiet. An older man pushing a baby carriage provided the only sign of life, witness to our disappointment and hunger.

Then the fairy tale started working its magic. ''Actually, I knew we couldn't get in,'' my son piped up, and suddenly both children were smiling. ''That's right,'' my daughter continued. ''You guys know there isn't any way into the tower.'' They pointed knowingly at the massive red stone cylinder rooted deep in the moat beneath us and looming high above the umber beams of the surrounding rooftops. The tiny slit of a window at the top appeared dreadfully dark from down below. ''If we could get in for lunch, then Rapunzel could have gotten out. Right?'' Right. After all, they now know best.

For a fee, Sleeping Beauty says hello
YOU can spot one from a mile away, ambling erratically through these streets, head flipped back like the top of a Pez dispenser, eyes scanning the building facades, searching: Have the windows been cleaned in the last six months? Are there curtains? Is light burning inside? Is the apartment free?

An unprecedented influx of young people, many of them from former West Germany, is affecting a demographic revolution in Prenzlauer Berg, Berlin's traditionally working class neighborhood just north of the city's historic center. Since the wall fell a decade ago, the neighborhood has witnessed a turnover of 50 percent. This past autumn's local elections revealed that more than a third of the district's voters were under 27 years old. Bars, cafes, Tuscan food -- the classic harbingers of metropolitan gentrification -- have arrived in full force. Where ownership has been clarified, the houses are renovated and resuscitated to their original 19th-century glory. Rooftop apartments, complete with built-in saunas and landscaped terraces, are on the market for a cool million marks -- about $560,000.

And yet, the magnetic force the neighborhood exerts on its newest residents appears to emanate less from the spanking newness than from the crumbling remains left between the cleared spaces, the psychic pull of Germany's swiftly fading physical past. At a time when the entire country is debating its attitude and responsibility toward recent history, Prenzlauer Berg still offers visible, palpable proof of that which was. War-wounded facades, dark courtyards, coal heating. Grayness. But also the colorful reminder of pink resistance to the Kaiser, red resistance to the Nazis, green resistance to the Communist regime, and throughout, a polychromatic atmosphere conducive to artistic endeavor, with all its subversive potential. For young people growing up in affluent, sanitized postwar Germany, the morbid romance of Prenzlauer Berg is nothing less than an epiphany.

Thomas Doetsch, an architecture student who moved to Prenzlauer Berg in 1992, recalls his first apartment on Schonhauser Allee. ''Toilet outside the apartment. No shower. I washed every morning in the freezing cold at my kitchen sink.'' And he's smiling as he speaks.

The neighborhood's historic authenticity owes much to its location; Allied bombings, aiming for Hitler's seat of power farther south, left the hilltop area predominantly intact.

Windmuhlenberg, or Windmill Mountain, as Prenzlauer Berg was first called, originally lay beyond Berlin's city wall. Until the 18th century, the three north-south arteries coursing through the neighborhood, Schonhauser Allee, Prenzlauer Allee and Greifswalder Strasse, were dirt paths separating privately owned plots of farmland. From 1858 to 1862 a residential plan was developed for the areas directly bordering the Altstadt, or Old City. Construction work coincided with the economic boom years following German unification in 1871. By 1920 Prenzlauer Berg had received its official name and the modest four-square-mile district boasted a record 316,659 residents -- more than twice the number living there today. A workers' tenement neighborhood had been born.

And yet viewed from the street, the neighborhood's architecture bears little resemblance to other 19th-century working class districts such as London's East End or New York's Lower East Side. To avoid the dangers of single-class slums, the houses were designed to contain a cross-section of the social body. Rich property owners lived in the front portions of the five-story buildings, accounting for the ornate neo-classical and Jugendstil facades, high ceilings and proportionally large windows. On an overcast winter day, if the lights are on inside, you can often catch a glimpse of elaborate ceiling moldings, painstakingly freed from generations of paint by patient hands.

The residents won't mind if you step into one of the enormous portals, past the facade and through the front house. Out in the first courtyard, boxed in by two side wings and a second, ''hind'' house, you can feel yourself slipping significantly, rung by rung, down the social ladder. For though the classes officially lived at the same address, they by no means lived the same. These workers' houses are substantially smaller, the apartments dark and cramped, the amenities bare-bones. The first courtyard is usually followed by a second and a third. The final building traditionally housed some small business or workshop. The bleak courtyards themselves were required by law to measure only 180 square feet -- just enough room for a fire engine to turn around, and no more.

Heading uphill on Schonhauser Allee is to imagine a far more radical transformation in social stature. A sign on the low red brick wall at 23-25 Schonhauser Allee reads: ''This Jewish cemetery was dedicated in 1827. In the years 1933-1945 it was destroyed by the Fascists. It should be preserved by posterity as an admonition.''

Just inside the 12-and-a-half-acre enclosure, another memorial wall cautions: ''Here you stand silent. But when you turn away, be silent no more.'' A final, far more practical, warning is posted on the groundskeeper's office to the right of the entrance, just below the rule prohibiting dogs: ''Visit at your own risk. Security cannot be guaranteed, because of loose gravestones.''

Plundered by the Nazis, pounded by Allied bombs, dug up for trench warfare, the ravaged cemetery is like many remnants of Jewish Berlin: this century's history renders it exceedingly difficult to think back to a time when Jews played an integral and comfortable role in German life. And yet many of the 22,500 remains beneath the chestnut trees and ivy carpet bear witness to that irretrievable German-Jewish cultural symbiosis that existed through the 1920's. Here lie Bismarck's financial adviser, Gerson von Bleichroder (1822-1893); the composer Giacomo Meyerbeer (1791-1864); the Impressionist painter and president of the Academy of Art, Max Liebermann (1847-1935).

Turning right off Schonhauser Allee onto Worther Strasse you approach the beating heart of the ''new'' old Prenzlauer Berg: Kollwitzplatz. Wolfgang Thierse, the president of the German Bundestag, has lived here for 27 years, and when offered a government apartment in the noble Dahlem district in West Berlin, he politely refused. Indeed, Worther, Knaack and Kollwitz Streets present an impressive ring of cafes and restaurants of every imaginable ethnic bent, surrounding a green idyll, from Alsatian fare at Gugelhof to tapas at the Santiago bar to Tuscan specialties at Trattoria Lappeggi.

In the center of the park, a great bronze maternal figure sits, pen in one hand, portfolio case in the other, her torso bent slightly forward, as if submitting to the weight of some unseen burden. The social-minded sculptor and graphic artist Kathe Kollwitz lived on this square at what is now 58 Kollwitzstrasse, from 1891 to 1943, when her original house was bombed and she left Berlin for good. Late on a winter morning, nine colorfully snowsuited 5-year-olds happily climb onto the artist's monumental lap.

Just around the corner on Knaackstrasse, the highest point of Prenzlauer Berg rises like a wooded minimountain, topped by an 1875 cylindrical water tower, the image that often serves as the neighborhood's ID picture. ''Fat Hermann,'' as Berliners fondly call it, together with ''Skinny Hermann,'' the thin twin column sharing the hill, provided the area with clean water and then adequate water pressure well into this century. Today the larger tower contains some of the most unusual homes in the neighborhood: 10 pie-shaped apartments, each slice a room, were originally conceived for the families of the waterworks technicians to allow for seamless supervision of the facility.

The view from atop the ridge would be restorative if it were not undermined by a dark history that literally cuts the ground out from under you: the grass and earth expanse beyond the thin tower rests on hollow space, a defunct 800,000-gallon water container. In 1933 Nazi storm troopers took over the inactive subterranean hall as a torture chamber for Communists, socialists, Jews and intellectuals. The victims' screams, magnified by cathedral-like acoustics, were meant to send a message to the left-leaning district. A plaque recalls ''the victims of Fascism at the water tower.'' These days, performance artists and musicians offer immensely popular ''sound installations'' in the space.

Proceeding north on any of the cobblestone streets -- Ryke, Husemann, Knaack -- will lead to Danziger Strasse, the east-west boulevard that constitutes a kind of invisible border in Prenzlauer Berg. The way many locals describe it, south of Danziger stands for a solely gastronomic culture, geared to resident students and tourists. North of Danziger has maintained more of the neighborhood's original village character, with family-run businesses that serve the community.

Stargarder Strasse, a parallel street north of Danziger, typifies this small town feel. Hardware store, stationer's, butcher, trendy haircutters (take a number at the door -- any cut for $11), and a corner pub surround the traditional center of German village life -- the church. This particular church, the 1893 Gethsemane Church at 77 Stargarder Strasse, made world headlines in the fall of 1989 when for weeks up to 3,000 East Germans filled its nave to protest the Communist regime. On those evenings, a candle burned in every other window of Stargarder and Greifenhagener Streets, and in so many other streets in the area. The buses and elevated trains passing by on Schonhauser Allee honked in solidarity. Now the white sheets hanging across the church's front portal announce, instead of a vigil for freedom and human rights, a casual evening of Bach. And still the people stand in line to get in, although they are now free to enjoy their classical music on the other side of town.

One final Prenzlauer Berg destination is best visited on a sunny day. Stroll down Oderberger Strasse, just off Schonhauser Allee, and imagine you are walking straight toward the wall. It's not there, of course, but it was for 28 years, isolating this half-restored, half-crumbling tree-lined street like a solid gray blindfold.

The grass-covered slope rising before you at the intersection of Bernauer and Eberswalder Streets is one end of the Wall Park, a memorial work in progress begun in 1994 and stretching westward along the former death strip to Gleimstrasse. At the top of the hill the enormous stadium lights of the Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn Sportpark loom over a 328-foot strip of graffiti-sprayed wall -- not the original. That ran across the bottom of the green, just beyond the few scattered plastic lawn chairs, the group of happy dogs chasing deflated soccer balls, the tottering toddlers. Beyond this, construction materials lie stored in a lot: towering piles of plaster board, steel rods and plastic pipes, disassembled scaffolding waiting to creep up another old house and reclaim it for the present.

THE gigantic rectangle of sky seems full of possibilities. But Prenzlauer Berg has taught you to receive such visceral pleasure with measured joy; you vainly search for the memorial plaque to remind you of the injustice, the pain and, yes, the deaths inflicted by the wall that engendered this open space. But here there is no sign. No admonishing quote.

Instead the creators of this Wall Park have mounted five swings at the top of the hill. Adult-sized swings set in beds of sand, spaced generously apart so you can hop on without fearing that anyone will catch you grinning uncontrollably once you get started.

Swing high. Kick sand. The sun throws your long shadow, swinging too, across the grass. As the air rushes past your face you can feel something new, a smell, a taste, a sense so natural to childhood, so essentially human and so vital to the future of this historically charged place surrounding you -- the feeling of light. And of lightness. It is a perfect monument to the spirit of the new Prenzlauer Berg. In a single moment it is crystal clear why from all over Germany, they want to come.
ASK to flip through the family photo album of a person who grew up in former East Germany and chances are excellent that you will discover the following image: a group of people seated on benches in a long black flat-bottomed boat, perhaps a table set with coffee or beer between them, and a standing gondolier holding a punting pole astern. The idyllic sun-speckled canal along which they ride cuts through a fairytale woods of birch, poplar and alder trees. The effect is timeless. Only the passengers' attire divulges the moment in the last century from which the two-dimensional faces gaze back.

This favorite photogenic background is the Spreewald, a 185-square-mile natural wonder just an hour's drive southeast of Berlin. Here, in the state of Brandenburg, before passing through Berlin, the Spree River divides itself into hundreds of narrow waterways, drawing a labyrinthine map across the sand and scree flattened during the late ice age.

Before the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, the Spreewald served as one of the foremost domestic tourist attractions in the German Democratic Republic, receiving Government-organized mass groups of workers, brought in by special train, directed through the main ''port'' at Lubbenau and sent off boat by boat to take in, collectively, the idyllic scenery. From a country of 17 million citizens, over one million people a year visited.

And yet the Spreewald's reputation as a tourist attraction predates the Workers' and Farmers' State. The area was put on the tourist map by Germany's most famous 19th-century domestic traveler, a native son of Brandenburg, the novelist Theodor Fontane. Writing in 1859 as part of his seminal ''Travels Through the Mark of Brandenburg,'' Fontane describes the Spreewald village of Lehde as ''a pocket-size lagoon city. Venice, as it might have looked 1,500 years ago.''

Spreewald residents love this comparison. (It appears in nearly every brochure and guidebook on the area.) However, beyond the myriad canals and bridges -- as in Venice, high-arching structures to allow the standing gondolier to pass underneath -- any similarities sunder into antithesis. If Venice, with its marble palazzos and paved campos, is a celebration of Civilization, a human-envisioned, human-erected, human-dominated reality posited upon the water, Spreewald's greatest asset is watery Nature pure. While the Piazza San Marco (the recurring background in Italian family photo albums) is a spot from which you can imagine challenging the rest of the enlightened world, Lubbenau, the modest gateway to the Upper Spreewald, is an ideal point for retreating from humanity entirely.

When riding on the water here, you are transported by a single turn off the main canal into extraordinary natural solitude. Dense emerald thickets of beech, ash and oak open suddenly onto sprawling lime-colored meadows stretching as far as the next limpid waterway. The thatch-roofed houses all but disappear in lush vegetation of the low-lying isles. In their waterside gardens, waxy orange pumpkins and small bronze onions pile high in baskets; curious chickens wander down to the bank for a look and a drink. As you glide along, songbirds and insects raise a racket above the gently lapping water. The faint pungency of decay speaks of the life and death of botanical abundance. Human voices, human vanities are subdued.

Although most Spreewald visitors are day-trippers, there is a reasonable assortment of lodgings, and ambitious outdoor adventurers can easily find days' worth of remote hiking trails and isolated canoeing courses. A bicycle is perhaps the best means of transportation for exploring local village life: Lubbenau's central market square; Burg, with its historic 1898 train station; Vetschau's 16th-century Schloss; or one of the many rustic restaurants serving local specialties, such as Cafe Venedig (Cafe Venice) in Lehde, nestled in the woodland along the water and inviting canoers to take a break with the scent of fresh coffee.

Beyond attracting forest-loving, coffee-drinking Germans, the natural isolation and sanctuary offered by the Spreewald has played a significant role in the region's history. The original settlers, as in most of former East Germany, were in fact, not Germans at all, but West Slavic tribes, known as Sorbs or Wenden, who arrived between the sixth and eighth centuries. During the subsequent German wars of expansion and well into this century, the Sorbs managed to preserve their culture and language in the impenetrable bayou-like Spreewald.

At the time of the National Socialists in the 1930's and early 1940's, Sorb organizations and newspapers were banned, but the people themselves, farmers who eked out a difficult living, were for the most part left in peace. After the war, the ethnic minority enjoyed tremendous support from the socialist government, and today, the constitutional rights of the Sorbs are protected by law.

One result of this conscious cultural preservation is that local signs are written in both German and Sorb: Lubbenau is Lubnjow; Lehde, Ledy; Leipe, Lipje. However, the Spreewald visitor eager to eavesdrop on this ethnic group will listen for Slavic tones in vain. Sorb as a spoken language has all but ceased to exist in the Spreewald, undermined by decades of steady assimilation. Nearly all of the estimated 40,000 Sorbs who speak the language live in the area around Bautzen in the neighboring state of Saxony. And yet, a day or weekend trip to the Spreewald still provides an opportunity to explore the history, traditions and customs of this once prevalent culture.

Easily reached by train or car, Lubbenau remains the natural starting point for a Spreewald excursion. Head straight for the harbor, where a tourist information center provides detailed listings of boat trips, kayak or bicycle rentals, nature walks and hotels. Among the gondoliers chatting at water's edge are several women dressed in traditional Sorb costume: full-skirted dresses with bands of colorfully embroidered flowers, intricate white lace aprons, bright shawls and wide decorative headdresses of carefully wrapped and pinned linen.

Just behind the harbor is a sign indicating the mile-and-a-quarter nature trail to Lehde, the 600-year-old settlement that so inspired Fontane. Until 1936, Lehde could be reached only by water. The raised path, with narrow parallel canals on either side and crossing several bridges, was built by Hitler's army as part of his envisioned European Trail extending from the Baltic to the Adriatic, and it is still limited to walkers and bicyclists today. (Motorists take a more circuitous route to Lehde.) The seemingly primeval wilderness deceives: older area residents recall a time when these surroundings were working fields. But the introduction of a market economy and international competition made traditional agricultural life increasingly infeasible.

When in 1991 Unesco declared the Spreewald an official biosphere reserve, special zoning was implemented to protect the indigenous and often rare flora and fauna, some 1,800 animals and 1,600 plants. The physical results along this half-hour walk are willow groves, stinging nettles and frogs where once pickling cucumbers, horseradish and flax grew. Luckily for the visitor, these Spreewald specialties can still be purchased at countless stands, even if the produce is often brought in from the Czech Republic and Poland to be processed here according to original local recipes.

TURNING left off the main trail, which continues another two and a half miles to Leipe -- Fontane wrote, ''If one were not Lehde, one would want to be Leipe'' -- one approaches Lehde. Dark wood Slavic block houses cluster around the small harbor where intersecting canals meet to discharge visitors. Bridges crisscross the waterways; each house appears to stand on its own island. Beyond these first dwellings wide fields fill in the muddy outlining canals with verdant green grass, bright red vervain, yellow crowfoot and the occasional brown cow. Round haystacks bulge along the banks like the straw onion domes of sunken cathedrals. Perched on top of a brick chimney, a white stork stands guard at its nest, surveying the human scene below: children in life vests clamoring for ice cream, groups of senior citizens inspecting outdoor displays of souvenir pottery, young couples with pierced body parts sipping beer and smoking at the waterside tables of Zum Frohlichen Hecht, or ''To the Happy Pike.''

Situated directly at the harbor, the open-air Spreewald-museum Lehde presents a strong picture of Sorb life in the last century and is housed in the three most common types of Spreewald farmsteads. The original buildings, brought to the site in the late 1950's, display the traditional tools that defined local life: farming implements, pickling barrels, fishing nets, looms, wash tubs, bread-baking ovens, the ubiquitous boats, or Kahne, unchanged for centuries, and wooden sleds that served as transportation when the canals froze over in winter. The original decor in the close, low-ceilinged living quarters reveals a life, by contemporary standards, of somewhat shocking intimacy. The charming woman stationed in the 1850 one-room home clearly takes pleasure in visitors' response when she explains that the high square bed positioned in the corner served all three generations of a Sorb family; only in the four weeks following their wedding was a young couple permitted to sleep on the floor by the fireplace in a bed of hay.

Returning to the present over a plate of fish with Spreewald sauce or Hefeplinsen, a kind of local crepe, it is worth considering the future of Sorb culture in the Spreewald. For despite the demise of the spoken language that has accompanied the influx of outsiders, these same visitors have helped kindle a renaissance of Sorb ritual and celebration practiced not only in the sterile realm of the museum, but in everyday life. Local residents are gradually learning to straddle the conceptual fence between culture and kitsch; folklore is giving way to folk fests, and local people as well as tourists are having a great time.

There is Zapust, the Sorb Carnival, when young couples in traditional costume parade through the villages on Sundays between Epiphany, Jan. 6, and the start of Lent, collecting donations of money and schnapps from their elders. At Easter, enormous bonfires are set and young women ladle ''Easter water'' from the canals. The Sorb harvest celebrations require young men galloping by on horseback to tear the head off a dead rooster hanging by its feet from a wooden beam.

There is a fair amount of drinking involved in all of this. And yet the commercialization remains innocent. The marketing of Sorb culture does not go much farther than stands selling hand-painted Easter eggs, schmaltz on peasant bread, dolls in Sorb costume and the ubiquitous Spreewald pickles. These periodic village festivals manage to satisfy both the tourists' fascination with the Spreewald's Slavic heritage and local residents' need to survive in a changed world.

Aside from these most human concerns, there remains the water. Still and immutable, it continues as the essential element of Spreewald life. The water alone makes it possible to remove oneself in a moment from the pressing present tense and float back to a past well worth preserving. And out on the water, more than anywhere else, it seems that the Spreewald has a future in family photo albums for a long time to come.

Boat tours stop for coffee and cake, and crepes are an afternoon snack

Getting There

Trains for Lubbenau depart hourly from Zoo Station in the western part of Berlin,or from the Friedrichstrasse station in the east. Round-trip tickets cost $20.60.
(All prices have been converted at 1.91 marks to the dollar.) Information: (49-1805) 996633.
By car from Berlin, take the A13 toward Dresden until you reach the Lubbenau exit.

Boat Tours

Tours on Spreewald's characteristic boats are organized by private companies in nearly every harbor in the Lubbenau area. There are no scheduled departure times -- when a boat is full it takes off.

The average price for a Kahn with tables is $2.60 an hour, which is paid directly to the driver on boarding. Soft drinks, beer and Spreewald Bitter, the local schnapps, are served during most trips at extra cost. Outings vary from two-hour round trips between Lubbenau and Lehde, to 10-hour excursions deep into the surrounding woods, including stops for meals, coffee and cake.

THE directionality of travel implies a departure and a return. You go away from home. You come back home. But for people like myself, who have chosen to live in foreign lands, this equation is reversed. Home becomes the temporary destination, and the return is to the other. The other language (German). The other time zone (Central European). The other color garbage trucks (orange). The other sound of the telephone ringing (low-pitched binary toots).

Among the expatriate community in Berlin, where I lived for 13 years, vacations home involved a standardized set of preparations that varied depending on the unique qualities of the traveler's mother country. Some of us purchased sunscreen. Some waxed their cross-country skis. Some married the father of their children. I waxed my legs.

Long-distance calls were placed to schedule dates with precious friends and relations, though the number of these arrangements tapered off proportionate, I found, to the number of years spent overseas. Only the freshly transplanted attempted to cram in as many people as possible on these rare visits home. For the seasoned ex-pats, the increased number of years abroad had witnessed a reduction in the number of intimate acquaintances left behind. Intense exposure to those remaining few appeared to be the strategy of choice.

Packing was a breeze. Guidebooks and maps could be left behind -- we finally knew where we were going! Instead, empty bags were folded diligently into the corners of underpacked suitcases, waiting to be jammed full with the familiar objects of home. (Rumford's double acting baking powder. Extra-strength Tylenol. Johnson & Johnson's No More Tangles.) And so Nada always returned from Holland with stories of her best friend Candy's saxophone concerts, and electric-orange packets of Indonesian rendang curry. During Farina's excursions to Singapore, she drank tea all day long with her parents and harvested enough cheaply manufactured children's toys to cover every birthday party for the coming year. Heather actually transported a three-foot pink plastic Christmas tree from Australia, the Tannenbaum of her youth, so that her children would sense a world of hot outback Noels, far from the redolent blue firs, pines and spruce that crowded Berlin's street corners, inviting purchase, throughout the month of December.

And myself? After a few days in New York City with my parents, I invariably planted my growing family in the guest quarters of my sister's successive homes. Destination: Bernardsville, N.J. Baltimore, Md., St. Louis, Mo.There were indeed years when the sheer physical effort of the journey with small children was near overwhelming: the time all the kids got chickenpox. The time all the kids had ear infections. The time all the kids had RSV -- a nasty respiratory virus that sent us shuttling back and forth in various constellations to the local emergency room. And the exasperating jet lag that robbed us of a week of uninterrupted sleep from our already chronically depleted accounts at the start and finish of every trip. But what else was there to do? Go to the Caribbean? Go to the south of France? A Baltic resort? It was vacation. We had to go home.

An equally routinized etiquette governed the return to Berlin. Friends would have stocked our refrigerator with milk, eggs and soft dandelion-yellow butter, hand-paddled into blocks at the local dairy shop. A fresh bread always waited on the counter. Sometimes a fat bar of Milka chocolate. But no one actually called us that first day, ostensibly out of respect for the vagaries of jet lag -- we might all have gratefully fallen asleep. But I believe the initial silence reflected a more profound recognition by those with first-hand experience of the dislocation inherent in coming back home to a place that was so clearly (never so clearly as in those first few hours) not home. Why, home was where we had just been!

On the other side of the ocean, my family similarly learned to accept an initial lack of communication on my part after our visits. Too much contact would have made the already painful transition even harder. Life in Berlin had to go on, go forward. And life in Berlin was good. We made it so. Only when we had re-established that happy European groove did we allow ourselves to entertain thoughts of the next foray westward over the Atlantic.

But of course this home, this eternal vacation goal of the expatriate, was in fact not home to us all, and here is where things get complicated. For while New York City might be my home, and English my native tongue, and Central Park the landscape of my dreams, my husband and children were born in Germany. They were born into a world of unrefrigerated beverages, high- speed trains to Oma's house (with butter and wurst sandwiches for the ride back) and formal ''you's,'' and W's that sound like V's, and Celsius und und und . . . These trips home for me and my non-German Berlin friends were nothing short of expeditions into foreign territories for our most intimate loved ones.

Thus when Anamarie took Joerg to visit her parents in Montana, he couldn't cope with every stranger he met telling him about a recent divorce, or stepdaughter's eating disorder, or father-in-law's degree of prostate enlargement. When Bernie took her young sons to Capetown, they failed to understand why they were forbidden to ride their bicycles freely through their grandparents' suburban neighborhood, beyond the protection of the armed guards at the property gate. When Silvia escorted Ralph to Sardinia in July, his pale Middle European skin broiled in the Mediterranean sun.

If home is where the heart is, and one's heart is with one's family, what happens when one's family occupies two different worlds? As Goethe famously wrote, ''Two hearts live, ach, in my breast.'' Or else our hearts become divided.

I CAN pinpoint the exact moment when I recognized that the time had come to follow my own heart back home. I was boarding a plane at JFK/NYC with my husband and children, bound for Berlin/Tegel. While rummaging through my knapsack for the boarding cards, I came across the eulogy I had just read at my grandmother's funeral, three days earlier. The words were scrawled on Lufthansa note-pad paper, my handwriting unsteady with grief and turbulence at 30,000 feet.

The crumpled white pages summoned the memory of my mother's face, so small and pale as I had spoken those words, my grandfather's gravelly voice, cracked with pain as he had said goodbye with the reminder, ''Kid, these are the best years of your life.'' My husband and children were ahead of me, patting our plane's cold metal exterior for good luck, such precious cargo stepping past the welcoming flight attendant, and it was all I could do to keep myself from tackling them from behind, heaving them, all three, onto my back and hauling them into a yellow cab headed for Manhattan. The directionality of life itself, its inexorable movement from beginning to end, had caught up with me. I knew we were traveling the wrong way.

Fifteen months later we moved to the U.S. I cannot write ''back to the U.S.,'' for I am the only one returning. Deep into our first winter, our children have learned that a 30-degree day is cold, not hot. My husband has learned to say, simply, ''Fine'' when people ask him how he is. And already we are plotting our next vacation to Germany. We have called our Berlin friends and scheduled dates. An empty suitcase will travel with us. We will fill it with Doktor Koch's multivitamin juice, Weleda calendula skin oil and goose-down square pillows. And a family-size jar of Nutella. And a loaf of sunflower bread. And four pairs of Giesswein boiled wool house slippers. For some of us, it will be the first vacation home in a long time.
THE world has listened in wonder and awe to the stories of hijacked planes on Sept. 11. The descriptions of those final moments of flight are testimonials to the brave human heart. There were people who faced their own imminent deaths, clear-eyed and sober. There were people who went down fighting. People who thought of others above themselves. Hearing of these people, we are filled with pride by association; touched, vicariously, with virtue. There were people, people like us, who were blessed in a moment of crisis with the Right Stuff.

And yet many of us must admit that we are also made of some Wrong Stuff. We get scared. We want everything to be O.K. for everyone. We want ourselves to be O.K. We want to get home in time for dinner. We want to kiss our children good night. For all the displayed heroism of which we can be so proud, something else is going on.

Suddenly the desire to provide hands-on care for one's own, to honor the mundane moments that constitute a cherished life -- goals that until now appeared in our harried culture to be endangered species, requiring vigorous commitment -- suddenly these goals smack of selfishness, even cowardice. All of us want to count ourselves among the brave. Yet as people stake spheres of safety for themselves and their loved ones, their chosen courses of action expose an army of private demons at work. Listen closely to your neighbors these days and within minutes you can hear the stuff that scares them in the night -- Fire. Disease. Suffocation. Separation.

While living in Germany for over a decade, I relished the sight of the New York skyline appearing out the airplane window on my visits home. It always seemed as if it had been raining in Berlin when I departed, and that when I arrived, the morning sun was shining over my destination, the city I had grown up in. Now the aerial view of Lower Manhattan rearing up from the water is forever punctured by that impossible collision and inferno. Now from the safety of a new New Jersey home, I gaze up at a vivid blue sky that engulfs the occasional military jet overhead. That deep autumnal blue that I so missed while living in gray Berlin mocks me as it fills the space once occupied by the twin towers. ''You wanted blue sky,'' it says. ''Here's your blue sky.'' Over the past 13 years, Manhattan has never been so near to me and it has never been so far away.

Ground travel to the city, by way of the Hudson River crossings, triggers a previously unimaginable internal debate. It is absurd, shameful even, but clamors to be heard. In choosing between bridge and tunnel, I find myself considering not traffic delays, not uptown versus downtown destinations, but the following: Would I rather perish in a brick-lined tube buried beneath the riverbed or on a steel platform suspended above it.

I call my mother, who lives on the Upper West Side, to discuss alternatives. It is not surprising that she instantly empathizes with my dilemma (after all, I must have inherited all this Wrong Stuff someplace) and responds in a heartbeat: ''Take the bridge, of course. The bridge would be much better.''

What we are saying in this conversation, is that, yes, it would be better to free fall from the upper level of the George Washington Bridge than to burn up in the Lincoln Tunnel. But there is more. What we are thinking, both of us, is that we can understand the victims of last month's attack, those victims trapped in the towers, who when faced with raging fires within, chose to run for the sky. What we are thinking, but not saying in this amazing turn on the classic mother-daughter conversation, is that in the world we now occupy, there are circumstances under which it indeed makes sense to follow your friends when they jump out the window of a very tall building.

A world away from these local travel logistics, across the ocean, there is my German father-in-law. Witnessing the fatal flights on CNN has led him on a journey through time to his own childhood travels, trekking across a landscape of bombed-out towns from Silesia to Hesse during the final year of World War II. Each day for a week he called, weeping, the images of smoking rubble in downtown Manhattan burning a pathway to his own past.

''Ich bin ein Amerikaner,'' he said to me across the phone lines, adopting John Kennedy's famous phrase of solidarity. And he cried again, not for America, but for his own shattered boyhood. My husband considered flying overseas to reassure him that all is all right. But, of course, all is not at all all right.

Hard to say when it will ever be. I ultimately drove through the Lincoln Tunnel, heart in my throat, to attend a funeral. The transverse had not become any safer in my mind. I could still imagine lots of awful things happening. What I could not imagine, however, was not going anyway. Similarly I am certain my husband will fly overseas to his parents when the basic need to see them outweighs simple primal fear. His need; my fear.


MEANWHILE I am left to shuttle my own children on this, the west side of the Hudson River. All around me, tanklike SUV's patrol the suburban roads, affording an apparent sense of security to the drivers within. And everywhere stars and stripes.
But no American flag graces the antenna of my car. It is not that I do not empathize with my grieving country. I empathize with grieving humanity. I have trouble drawing lines that divide the innocent according to nationality, because the violence clearly does not. Of the people reported missing in the attacks of Sept. 11, many are from countries that honor other flags. Not to mention those victims' mothers and fathers. Their aunts and nephews. Their colleagues and former boyfriends.

Though I may be stuck here for some time, grounded by my own fears and cursed Wrong Stuff, I will continue to consider myself a citizen of the world. I may not be traveling by air today, or tomorrow, but my thoughts can travel to the others on the planet who aren't sleeping well, either -- people living just outside Jerusalem and Belfast and San Salvador and Jakarta. People everywhere hoping to rise to the awful occasion if necessary, but afraid, too. And I know, with some small comfort, that the bridges that connect us, forged as they are in the frail human heart, cannot be destroyed.
